docs/README.md, before:

## DBAddin

DBAddin is a ExcelDNA based Add-in for Database interoperability.

First, DBaddin provides DB Functions (see [DBFuncs Userdoc](DBFuncs.md)), which are an alternative to the Excel built-in MSQuery (integrated statically into worksheets having severe limitations in terms of querying and constructing parameterized queries (MS-Query allows parameterized queries only in simple queries that can be displayed graphically)).  

Next, methods for working with database data ([DBModifications](DBModif.md): DBMapper, DBAction and DBSequences) are included. This also includes a row entry oriented way to modify data in so called DBSheets (see [DBSheets](DBSheets.md)).

DBAddin.NET is the successor to the VB6 based Office Database Addin, see also the [slideshow](https://rkapl123.github.io/dbaddinslides/) for a quick overview.

### Installation

* Dependencies/Prerequisites
	* .NET 4.7 or higher (usually distributed with Windows)
	* Excel (minimum 2007 because of Ribbons)
	* ADO 2.5 or higher (usually distributed with Windows, needed as long as ADODB is still used)

If any of these are missing, please install them yourself before starting DBAddin.

Download the latest zip package in [https://github.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/tags](https://github.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/tags), unzip to any location and run deployAddin.cmd in the folder Distribution.
This copies DBAddin.xll, DBAddin.xll.config, DBaddinUser.config and DBAddinCentral.config to your %appdata%\Microsoft\AddIns folder and starts Excel for activating DBAddin (adding it to the registered Addins).

### Settings

Settings can be configured in three config files, depending on your distribution requirements:

* DBAddin.xll.config in section appSettings. DBAddin.xll.config has a reference
  * to DBAddinCentral.config in the file attribute of the appSettings element and
  * to DBaddinUser.config in the configSource attribute of the UserSettings element
  DBAddin.xll.config is expected in the same folder as the DBAddin.xll (%appdata%\Microsoft\AddIns)
* DBAddinCentral.config (this is a reference copy of the appSettings section, where the key/value pairs override the settings in DBAddin.xll.config). This is meant to be a centrally maintained settings configuration.
* DBaddinUser.config (this is a reference copy of the UserSettings section, where the key/value pairs override both the settings in DBAddin.xll.config and DBAddinCentral.config). This is meant to be a user locally maintained settings configuration.

In the DBAddin settings Group, there is a dropdown named "settings", where you can modify these three settings inside Excel.

After installation you'd want to adapt the connection strings (ConstConnString**N**) that are globally applied if no function-specific connection string is given and environment **N** is selected.
This can be done by modifying DBAddin.xll.config or the referred DBaddinUser.config or DBAddinCentral.config (in this example the settings apply to environment 3):

```xml
<appSettings>
    <add key="ConfigName3" value="MSSQL"/>
    <add key="ConstConnString3" value="provider=SQLOLEDB;Server=Lenovo-PC;Trusted_Connection=Yes;Database=pubs;Packet Size=32767"/>
    <add key="ConfigStoreFolder3" value="C:\dev\DBAddin.NET\source\ConfigStore"/>
    <add key="DBidentifierCCS3" value="Database="/>
    <add key="DBSheetDefinitions3" value="C:\dev\DBAddin.NET\definitions"/>
    <add key="dbGetAll3" value="sp_helpdb"/>
    <add key="dbGetAllFieldName3" value="name"/>
    <add key="ownerQualifier3" value=".dbo."/>
    <add key="DBSheetConnString3" value="DRIVER=SQL SERVER;Server=Lenovo-PC;UID=sa;PWD=;Database=pubs;"/>
    <add key="dbPwdSpec3" value="PWD="/>
    <add key="ConnStringSearch3" value="provider=SQLOLEDB"/>
    <add key="ConnStringReplace3" value="driver=SQL SERVER"/>
</appSettings>
```

Explanation:
*   `ConfigName`**N**: freely definable name for your environment (e.g. Production or your database instance)
*   `ConstConnString`**N**: the standard connection string used to connect to the database
*   `ConfigStoreFolder`**N**: all config files (*.xcl) under this folder are shown in a hierarchical manner in "load config"
*   `DBidentifierCCS`**N**: used to identify the database within the standard connection string or within DBSheetConnString
*   `DBSheetDefinitions`**N**: path to the stored DBSheetdefinitions (default directory of assign DBsheet definitions and load/save DBSheet Defintions)
*   `dbGetAll`**N**: command for retrieving all databases/schemas from the database can be entered (for (MS) SQL server this is "`sp_helpdb`" for Oracle its "`select username from sys.all_users`".
*   `dbGetAllFieldName`**N**: If the result of above command has more than one column (like in sqlserver), you have to give the fieldname where the databases can be retrieved from.
*   `ownerQualifier`**N**: default owner qualifier for table when loading DBSheet definitions, if table name is not fully qualified (legacy DBSheet definitions)
*   `DBSheetConnString`**N**: the connection string used to connect to the database for the DBSheet definitions
*   `dbPwdSpec`**N**: Password entry specifier within DBSheetConnString
*   `ConnStringSearch`**N**: part to be searched for replacement within the standard connection string in DBSetQuery
*   `ConnStringReplace`**N**: replacement for above

### Settings continued

Other settings possible in DBAddin.xll.config (or DBAddinCentral.config):

```xml
    <add key="LocalHelp" value="C:\dev\DBAddin.NET\docs\doc\rkapl123.github.io\DBAddin\index.html"/>
    <add key="CmdTimeout" value="30" />
    <add key="CnnTimeout" value="15" />
    <add key="DefaultDBDateFormatting" value="0" />
    <add key="DefaultEnvironment" value="3" />
    <add key="DontChangeEnvironment" value="False" />
    <add key="maxCellCount" value="300000" />
    <add key="maxCellCountIgnore" value="False" />
    <add key="DebugAddin" value="False" />
    <add key="DBMapperCUDFlagStyle" value="TableStyleLight11" />
    <add key="DBMapperStandardStyle" value="TableStyleLight9" />
    <add key="maxNumberMassChange" value="10" />
    <add key="connIDPrefixDBtype" value="MSSQL" />
    <add key="DBSheetAutoname" value="True" />
    <add key="disableSettingsDisplay" value="addin"/>
    <add key="ConfigSelect" value="SELECT TOP 10 * FROM !Table!" />
    <add key="ConfigSelectWithCount" value="SELECT (SELECT Count(*) FROM !Table!) Anzahl, TOP 10 * FROM !Table!" />
    <add key="ConfigSelect2" value="SELECT * FROM !Table!" />
    <add key="ConfigSelectPreference" value="WithCount" />
    <add key="updatesMajorVersion" value="1.0.0." />
    <add key="updatesDownloadFolder" value="C:\temp\" />
    <add key="updatesUrlBase" value="https://github.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/archive/refs/tags/" />
    <add key="localUpdateFolder" value="" />
    <add key="localUpdateMessage" value="New version available in local update folder, start deployAddin.cmd to install it:" />
```

Explanation:
*   `LocalHelp`: the path to local help files downloadable [here](doc.zip). To include it, extract the package into the respective folder and assign the file accordingly.
*   `CmdTimeout`: the default timeout for a command to execute.
*   `CnnTimeout`: the default timeout for connecting.
*   `DefaultDBDateFormatting`: default formatting choice for DBDate.
*   `DefaultEnvironment`: default selected environment on startup.
*   `DontChangeEnvironment`: prevent changing the environment selector (Non-Production environments might confuse some people or lead to errors).
*   `maxCellCount`: Cells being filled in Excel Workbook to issue a warning for refreshing DBFunctions (searching for them might take a long time).
*   `maxCellCountIgnore`: Don't issue a warning, therefore ignore above setting.
*   `DebugAddin`: activate Info messages to debug addin.
*   `DBMapperCUDFlagStyle`: Style for setting Excel data tables when having CUD Flags set on DBMappers.
*   `DBMapperStandardStyle`: Style for setting Excel data tables when not having CUD Flags set on DBMappers.
*   `maxNumberMassChange`: Threshold of Number of changes in CUDFlag DBMappers to issue a warning.
*   `connIDPrefixDBtype`: legacy DBSheet definitions have a Prefix in `connID` before the database that needs to be removed, this is the String to remove ...
*   `DBSheetAutoname`: When inserting DBSheet Definitions, automatically name Worksheet to the table name, if this is set.
*   `disableSettingsDisplay`: enter a name here for settings that should not be available for viewing/editing to the user (`addin`: DBAddin.xll.config, `central`: DBAddinCentral.config, `user`: DBaddinUser.config).
*   `ConfigSelect`**Postfix**: Use this template instead of standard config (currently `SELECT TOP 10000 * FROM <Table>`) when inserting cell configurations. The respective Table is being replaced into `!Table!`. Add **Postfix** to make different choices, the preferred choice is given in next setting.
*   `ConfigSelectPreference`: select the preferred choice if ConfigSelect here by setting **Postfix** as value. If `ConfigSelect`**Postfix** is not found in the choices, the plain `ConfigSelect` is taken. If that is also not found, no template is used and the standard config is taken.
*   `updatesMajorVersion`: Usually the versions are numbered 1.0.0.x, in case this is different, the Major Version can be overridden here.
*   `updatesDownloadFolder`: You can specify a different download folder here instead of `C:\temp\`.
*   `updatesUrlBase`: Here, the URL base for the update zip packages can be overridden.
*   `localUpdateFolder`: For updating the DB-Addin Version, you can provide an alternative folder, where the deploy script and the files are maintained for other users.
*   `localUpdateMessage`: For the alternative folder update, you can also provide an alternative message to display.

To change the settings, there use the dropdown "settings", where you can modify the DBAddin.xll.config and the referred DBAddinCentral.config including XML validation. If you have multiple same named entries in your settings files, the last one is taken as the active setting.

### Testing

Testing for MS SQL Server and other databases (MySQL, Oracle, PostgreSQL, DB2, Sybase and Access) can be done using the Testing Workbook "DBFuncsTest.xls".
To use that Testing Workbook you'll need the pubs database, where I have scripts available for Oracle, Sybase, DB2, PostgreSQL and MySql [here](PUBS_database_scripts.zip) (the MS-SQLserver version can be downloaded [here](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=23654)). I've also added a pubs.mdb Access database in the test folder.

When starting the Testworkbook, after waiting for the – probable – connection error, you have to change the connection string(s) to suit your needs (see below for explanations).

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/DBFunctionsTest.PNG)

Several connection strings for "DBFuncsTest.xls" are placed to the right of the black line, the actual connection is then selected by choosing the appropriate shortname (dropdown) in the yellow input field. After the connection has been changed don't forget to refresh the queries/DBforms by right clicking and selecting "refresh data".

### AboutBox, Logs, Purge hidden names and other tools

The Aboutbox can be reached by clicking the small dialogBox Launcher in the right bottom corner of the General Settings group of the DBAddin Ribbon:

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/AboutBox.PNG)  

You can get updates from here, in case there are new versions, this is shown with an orange background and a hint:

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/AboutBoxUpdateAvailable.PNG)  

There is a possibility to set the future log events displayed (the starting value is set in the config file).

To see the Log, there is a separate Button in the log group of the DBAddin ribbon that also indicates the existence of warning log entries with a red exclamation mark.

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/ConfigMenu.PNG)  

The DBListFetch's and DBRowFetch's target areas' extent is stored in hidden named ranges assigned both to the calling function cell (DBFsource(Key)) and the target (DBFtarget(Key)). These hidden names are used to keep track of the previous content to prevent overwriting, clearing old values, etc.
Sometimes during copying and pasting DB Functions, these names can get mixed up, leading to strange results or non-functioning of the "jump" function. In these cases, there is a tool in the DB Addin tools group, which may be used to "purge" these hidden named ranges in case of any strange behaviour due to multiple name assignments to the same area.  This button is only usable if clicked while pressing the Shift button. If the purge button is clicked while pressing the Ctrl Button, the hidden names used for the DB functions are unhidden and the Name manager is displayed.

The tool "Buttons" is used for switching designmode for DBModifier Buttons (identical to standard Excel button "Design Mode" in Ribbon "Developer tab", Group "Controls")

You can also fix legacy DBAddin functions in case you decided to skip the possibility offered on opening a Workbook with the "repair legacy function" button.

In the DBAddin settings Group, there is a dropdown "settings", where you can modify the DBAddin.xll.config and the referred DBAddinUser.config and DBAddinCentral.config including XML validation.

Right besides that dropdown, there is a shortcut to the Workbook properties (being the standard dialog Advanced Properties, accessible via File/Info) that allows you to change custom properties settings for DBAddin.
A green check shows that custom property DBFskip is not set to true for this workbook, therefore refreshing DB functions on opening the Workbook.

### Adhoc SQL Commands

Another tool is the entry of quick (adhoc) SQL Commands in the combo box below the settings dropdown. Changing the combo box opens the AdHoc SQL Command dialog:

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/AdHocSQL.PNG)  

Select Statements (beginning with `select`) are executed immediately, empty statements (using a space character in the combobox) don't execute anything, and everything else is regarded as a DML command and is only executed after confirmation:

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/AdHocSQL_DML.PNG)  

Results are shown below the SQL Command text entry.
In case of an error the exception from the database command is displayed, for DML commands the records affected are shown:

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/AdHocSQL_DML_Result.PNG)  

You can modify the command in the AdHoc SQL Command dialog, by clicking `Execute` or pressing `Ctrl-Return` the command will be executed. To change the database context, use the dropdown `Database`. To leave the dialog without any further action, hit ESC or click `Close`. To transfer the SQL command into the current cell (replacing any query in a possible DB Function there), click `Transfer` or press `Shift-Return`.

All issued commands are stored in the user settings and reloaded at start-up of the Add-In (Excel), if you want to get rid of them, open the User-Settings as described in [Settings](#settings) and remove all unwanted entries starting with `key="AdhocSQLcmd.."`

### Building

All packages necessary for building are contained, simply open DBaddin.sln and build the solution. The script `deployForTest.cmd` can be used to quickly deploy the built xll and configs to `%appdata%\Microsoft\AddIns` after choosing the solution configuration (Release or Debug).

### Roadmap

Following topics are still to be done:

* Completely getting rid of ADODB (this is a legacy from transforming the code of the old Addin)
* Fixing the problems with shifting formula ranges in case of shifting mode 1 (cells) in DBListFetch
* Utilizing optimistic concurrency for DBSheets (similar to the old Addin, but with ADO.NET support)

### docfx generated API documentation
[DBFuncs API documentation](api/index.html).

Commit message:

added timer and interrupt possibility to AdHocSQL dialog fixed strange occuring excel bug with QueryTables above each other and being extended manually (broke the refresh) Added command timeout parameter respecting to DBAction and AdHocSQL.

docs/README.md, after:

## DBAddin

DBAddin is a ExcelDNA based Add-in for Database interoperability.

First, DBaddin provides DB Functions (see [DBFuncs Userdoc](DBFuncs.md)), which are an alternative to the Excel built-in MSQuery (integrated statically into worksheets having severe limitations in terms of querying and constructing parameterized queries (MS-Query allows parameterized queries only in simple queries that can be displayed graphically)).  

Next, methods for working with database data ([DBModifications](DBModif.md): DBMapper, DBAction and DBSequences) are included. This also includes a row entry oriented way to modify data in so called DBSheets (see [DBSheets](DBSheets.md)).

DBAddin.NET is the successor to the VB6 based Office Database Addin, see also the [slideshow](https://rkapl123.github.io/dbaddinslides/) for a quick overview.

### Installation

* Dependencies/Prerequisites
	* .NET 4.7 or higher (usually distributed with Windows)
	* Excel (minimum 2007 because of Ribbons)
	* ADO 2.5 or higher (usually distributed with Windows, needed as long as ADODB is still used)

If any of these are missing, please install them yourself before starting DBAddin.

Download the latest zip package in [https://github.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/tags](https://github.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/tags), unzip to any location and run deployAddin.cmd in the folder Distribution.
This copies DBAddin.xll, DBAddin.xll.config, DBaddinUser.config and DBAddinCentral.config to your %appdata%\Microsoft\AddIns folder and starts Excel for activating DBAddin (adding it to the registered Addins).

### Settings

Settings can be configured in three config files, depending on your distribution requirements:

* DBAddin.xll.config in section appSettings. DBAddin.xll.config has a reference
  * to DBAddinCentral.config in the file attribute of the appSettings element and
  * to DBaddinUser.config in the configSource attribute of the UserSettings element
  DBAddin.xll.config is expected in the same folder as the DBAddin.xll (%appdata%\Microsoft\AddIns)
* DBAddinCentral.config (this is a reference copy of the appSettings section, where the key/value pairs override the settings in DBAddin.xll.config). This is meant to be a centrally maintained settings configuration.
* DBaddinUser.config (this is a reference copy of the UserSettings section, where the key/value pairs override both the settings in DBAddin.xll.config and DBAddinCentral.config). This is meant to be a user locally maintained settings configuration.

In the DBAddin settings Group, there is a dropdown named "settings", where you can modify these three settings inside Excel.

After installation you'd want to adapt the connection strings (ConstConnString**N**) that are globally applied if no function-specific connection string is given and environment **N** is selected.
This can be done by modifying DBAddin.xll.config or the referred DBaddinUser.config or DBAddinCentral.config (in this example the settings apply to environment 3):

```xml
<appSettings>
    <add key="ConfigName3" value="MSSQL"/>
    <add key="ConstConnString3" value="provider=SQLOLEDB;Server=Lenovo-PC;Trusted_Connection=Yes;Database=pubs;Packet Size=32767"/>
    <add key="ConfigStoreFolder3" value="C:\dev\DBAddin.NET\source\ConfigStore"/>
    <add key="DBidentifierCCS3" value="Database="/>
    <add key="DBSheetDefinitions3" value="C:\dev\DBAddin.NET\definitions"/>
    <add key="dbGetAll3" value="sp_helpdb"/>
    <add key="dbGetAllFieldName3" value="name"/>
    <add key="ownerQualifier3" value=".dbo."/>
    <add key="DBSheetConnString3" value="DRIVER=SQL SERVER;Server=Lenovo-PC;UID=sa;PWD=;Database=pubs;"/>
    <add key="dbPwdSpec3" value="PWD="/>
    <add key="ConnStringSearch3" value="provider=SQLOLEDB"/>
    <add key="ConnStringReplace3" value="driver=SQL SERVER"/>
</appSettings>
```

Explanation:
*   `ConfigName`**N**: freely definable name for your environment (e.g. Production or your database instance)
*   `ConstConnString`**N**: the standard connection string used to connect to the database
*   `ConfigStoreFolder`**N**: all config files (*.xcl) under this folder are shown in a hierarchical manner in "load config"
*   `DBidentifierCCS`**N**: used to identify the database within the standard connection string or within DBSheetConnString
*   `DBSheetDefinitions`**N**: path to the stored DBSheetdefinitions (default directory of assign DBsheet definitions and load/save DBSheet Defintions)
*   `dbGetAll`**N**: command for retrieving all databases/schemas from the database can be entered (for (MS) SQL server this is "`sp_helpdb`" for Oracle its "`select username from sys.all_users`".
*   `dbGetAllFieldName`**N**: If the result of above command has more than one column (like in sqlserver), you have to give the fieldname where the databases can be retrieved from.
*   `ownerQualifier`**N**: default owner qualifier for table when loading DBSheet definitions, if table name is not fully qualified (legacy DBSheet definitions)
*   `DBSheetConnString`**N**: the connection string used to connect to the database for the DBSheet definitions
*   `dbPwdSpec`**N**: Password entry specifier within DBSheetConnString
*   `ConnStringSearch`**N**: part to be searched for replacement within the standard connection string in DBSetQuery
*   `ConnStringReplace`**N**: replacement for above

### Settings continued

Other settings possible in DBAddin.xll.config (or DBAddinCentral.config):

```xml
    <add key="LocalHelp" value="C:\dev\DBAddin.NET\docs\doc\rkapl123.github.io\DBAddin\index.html"/>
    <add key="CmdTimeout" value="30" />
    <add key="CnnTimeout" value="15" />
    <add key="DefaultDBDateFormatting" value="0" />
    <add key="DefaultEnvironment" value="3" />
    <add key="DontChangeEnvironment" value="False" />
    <add key="maxCellCount" value="300000" />
    <add key="maxCellCountIgnore" value="False" />
    <add key="DebugAddin" value="False" />
    <add key="DBMapperCUDFlagStyle" value="TableStyleLight11" />
    <add key="DBMapperStandardStyle" value="TableStyleLight9" />
    <add key="maxNumberMassChange" value="10" />
    <add key="connIDPrefixDBtype" value="MSSQL" />
    <add key="DBSheetAutoname" value="True" />
    <add key="disableSettingsDisplay" value="addin"/>
    <add key="ConfigSelect" value="SELECT TOP 10 * FROM !Table!" />
    <add key="ConfigSelectWithCount" value="SELECT (SELECT Count(*) FROM !Table!) Anzahl, TOP 10 * FROM !Table!" />
    <add key="ConfigSelect2" value="SELECT * FROM !Table!" />
    <add key="ConfigSelectPreference" value="WithCount" />
    <add key="updatesMajorVersion" value="1.0.0." />
    <add key="updatesDownloadFolder" value="C:\temp\" />
    <add key="updatesUrlBase" value="https://github.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/archive/refs/tags/" />
    <add key="localUpdateFolder" value="" />
    <add key="localUpdateMessage" value="New version available in local update folder, start deployAddin.cmd to install it:" />
```

Explanation:
*   `LocalHelp`: the path to local help files downloadable [here](doc.zip). To include it, extract the package into the respective folder and assign the file accordingly.
*   `CmdTimeout`: the default timeout for a command to execute.
*   `CnnTimeout`: the default timeout for connecting.
*   `DefaultDBDateFormatting`: default formatting choice for DBDate.
*   `DefaultEnvironment`: default selected environment on startup.
*   `DontChangeEnvironment`: prevent changing the environment selector (Non-Production environments might confuse some people or lead to errors).
*   `maxCellCount`: Cells being filled in Excel Workbook to issue a warning for refreshing DBFunctions (searching for them might take a long time).
*   `maxCellCountIgnore`: Don't issue a warning, therefore ignore above setting.
*   `DebugAddin`: activate Info messages to debug addin.
*   `DBMapperCUDFlagStyle`: Style for setting Excel data tables when having CUD Flags set on DBMappers.
*   `DBMapperStandardStyle`: Style for setting Excel data tables when not having CUD Flags set on DBMappers.
*   `maxNumberMassChange`: Threshold of Number of changes in CUDFlag DBMappers to issue a warning.
*   `connIDPrefixDBtype`: legacy DBSheet definitions have a Prefix in `connID` before the database that needs to be removed, this is the String to remove ...
*   `DBSheetAutoname`: When inserting DBSheet Definitions, automatically name Worksheet to the table name, if this is set.
*   `disableSettingsDisplay`: enter a name here for settings that should not be available for viewing/editing to the user (`addin`: DBAddin.xll.config, `central`: DBAddinCentral.config, `user`: DBaddinUser.config).
*   `ConfigSelect`**Postfix**: Use this template instead of standard config (currently `SELECT TOP 10000 * FROM <Table>`) when inserting cell configurations. The respective Table is being replaced into `!Table!`. Add **Postfix** to make different choices, the preferred choice is given in next setting.
*   `ConfigSelectPreference`: select the preferred choice if ConfigSelect here by setting **Postfix** as value. If `ConfigSelect`**Postfix** is not found in the choices, the plain `ConfigSelect` is taken. If that is also not found, no template is used and the standard config is taken.
*   `updatesMajorVersion`: Usually the versions are numbered 1.0.0.x, in case this is different, the Major Version can be overridden here.
*   `updatesDownloadFolder`: You can specify a different download folder here instead of `C:\temp\`.
*   `updatesUrlBase`: Here, the URL base for the update zip packages can be overridden.
*   `localUpdateFolder`: For updating the DB-Addin Version, you can provide an alternative folder, where the deploy script and the files are maintained for other users.
*   `localUpdateMessage`: For the alternative folder update, you can also provide an alternative message to display.

To change the settings, there use the dropdown "settings", where you can modify the DBAddin.xll.config and the referred DBAddinCentral.config including XML validation. If you have multiple same named entries in your settings files, the last one is taken as the active setting.

### Testing

Testing for MS SQL Server and other databases (MySQL, Oracle, PostgreSQL, DB2, Sybase and Access) can be done using the Testing Workbook "DBFuncsTest.xls".
To use that Testing Workbook you'll need the pubs database, where I have scripts available for Oracle, Sybase, DB2, PostgreSQL and MySql [here](PUBS_database_scripts.zip) (the MS-SQLserver version can be downloaded [here](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=23654)). I've also added a pubs.mdb Access database in the test folder.

When starting the Testworkbook, after waiting for the – probable – connection error, you have to change the connection string(s) to suit your needs (see below for explanations).

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/DBFunctionsTest.PNG)

Several connection strings for "DBFuncsTest.xls" are placed to the right of the black line, the actual connection is then selected by choosing the appropriate shortname (dropdown) in the yellow input field. After the connection has been changed don't forget to refresh the queries/DBforms by right clicking and selecting "refresh data".

### AboutBox, Logs, Purge hidden names and other tools

The Aboutbox can be reached by clicking the small dialogBox Launcher in the right bottom corner of the General Settings group of the DBAddin Ribbon:

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/AboutBox.PNG)  

You can get updates from here, in case there are new versions, this is shown with an orange background and a hint:

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/AboutBoxUpdateAvailable.PNG)  

There is a possibility to set the future log events displayed (the starting value is set in the config file).

To see the Log, there is a separate Button in the log group of the DBAddin ribbon that also indicates the existence of warning log entries with a red exclamation mark.

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/ConfigMenu.PNG)  

The DBListFetch's and DBRowFetch's target areas' extent is stored in hidden named ranges assigned both to the calling function cell (DBFsource(Key)) and the target (DBFtarget(Key)). These hidden names are used to keep track of the previous content to prevent overwriting, clearing old values, etc.
Sometimes during copying and pasting DB Functions, these names can get mixed up, leading to strange results or non-functioning of the "jump" function. In these cases, there is a tool in the DB Addin tools group, which may be used to "purge" these hidden named ranges in case of any strange behaviour due to multiple name assignments to the same area.  This button is only usable if clicked while pressing the Shift button. If the purge button is clicked while pressing the Ctrl Button, the hidden names used for the DB functions are unhidden and the Name manager is displayed.

The tool "Buttons" is used for switching designmode for DBModifier Buttons (identical to standard Excel button "Design Mode" in Ribbon "Developer tab", Group "Controls")

You can also fix legacy DBAddin functions in case you decided to skip the possibility offered on opening a Workbook with the "repair legacy function" button.

In the DBAddin settings Group, there is a dropdown "settings", where you can modify the DBAddin.xll.config and the referred DBAddinUser.config and DBAddinCentral.config including XML validation.

Right besides that dropdown, there is a shortcut to the Workbook properties (being the standard dialog Advanced Properties, accessible via File/Info) that allows you to change custom properties settings for DBAddin.
A green check shows that custom property DBFskip is not set to true for this workbook, therefore refreshing DB functions on opening the Workbook.

### Adhoc SQL Commands

Another tool is the entry of quick (adhoc) SQL Commands in the combo box below the settings dropdown. Changing the combo box opens the AdHoc SQL Command dialog:

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/AdHocSQL.PNG)  

Select Statements (beginning with `select`) are executed immediately, empty statements (using a space character in the combobox) don't execute anything, and everything else is regarded as a DML command and is only executed after confirmation:

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/AdHocSQL_DML.PNG)  

Results are shown below the SQL Command text entry, for row returning commands, the rows returned are shown including the time it took to finish the command at the bottom of the dialog.
In case of an error the exception from the database command is displayed, for DML commands the records affected are shown (again including the time it took to finish the command):

![image](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/rkapl123/DBAddin/master/docs/image/AdHocSQL_DML_Result.PNG)  

You can modify the command in the AdHoc SQL Command dialog, by clicking `Execute` or pressing `Ctrl-Return` the command will be executed. To change the database context, use the dropdown `Database`. To leave the dialog without any further action, hit ESC or click `Close`. To transfer the SQL command into the current cell (replacing any query in a possible DB Function there), click `Transfer` or press `Shift-Return`.
To close the dialog including adding it to the combobox, click `Add`. You can always interrupt long running commands by clicking `Close` (or hitting ESC), `Add` or `Transfer`. A question whether to cancel the interruption is provided then.

All issued commands are stored in the user settings and reloaded at start-up of the Add-In (Excel), if you want to get rid of them, open the User-Settings as described in [Settings](#settings) and remove all unwanted entries starting with `key="AdhocSQLcmd.."`

### Building

All packages necessary for building are contained, simply open DBaddin.sln and build the solution. The script `deployForTest.cmd` can be used to quickly deploy the built xll and configs to `%appdata%\Microsoft\AddIns` after choosing the solution configuration (Release or Debug).

### Roadmap

Following topics are still to be done:

* Completely getting rid of ADODB (this is a legacy from transforming the code of the old Addin)
* Fixing the problems with shifting formula ranges in case of shifting mode 1 (cells) in DBListFetch
* Utilizing optimistic concurrency for DBSheets (similar to the old Addin, but with ADO.NET support)

### docfx generated API documentation
[DBFuncs API documentation](api/index.html).
